Dev Docs: Style Guide (#308)
rucio/documentation: docs/developer/style_guide.md

* When importing a module specifically for type checking (e.g. a core module that may not be included in every distribution of rucio, a type from SQLAlchemy), contain them in a block using 
```python
from typing import TYPE_CHECKING
if TYPE_CHECKING: 
    from {package} import {module}
```

[`ruff's isort` implementation](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/faq/#how-does-ruffs-import-sorting-compare-to-isort) handles import sorting in the rucio `pre-commit`s. 

#### Examples: 
```python 
 # Wrong
import rucio  
from datetime import * 
import os 

 # Right
import os 
from datetime import datetime, timedelta

from rucio.core.did import add_did
```

```python 
 # Wrong
from packageA import moduleA, moduleB, moduleC, moduleD, moduleE, moduleF, moduleG, ...

 # Right
from packageA import ( 
  moduleA, 
  moduleB, 
  moduleC, 
  moduleD, 
  moduleE,
  moduleF, 
  moduleG, 
  ...
)
```

# SQLAlchemy Query Guide 
Rucio uses a custom SQLAlchemy style. 
Each major clause or operation is given a new line, and a level of indentation is added for each operation within a part of a query.

> When queries as executed, perfered output types are either scalars or single values, to avoid using an index to select an element out of a query. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When queries are executed, preferred output types are either scalars or single values, to avoid using an index to select an element out of a query. 
```

Shorter statements can be written on a single line. 

> > **Note** - When using SQLAlchemy to make query data model, it is best practice to call the code executed (the `select` statment or similar) `statement` or `stmt`. The actual `query` is the result of the statement's execution. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note** - When using SQLAlchemy to make query data model, it is best practice to name the code executed (the `select` statement or similar) `statement` or `stmt`. The actual `query` is the result of the statement's execution. 
```
sorry for being pedantic on this one, but I think it's a bit clearer this way, as people might interpret "to call the code" in the sense of "to run the code".

Also I think the whole "When using SQLAlchemy to make query data model" sentence could be deleted, as this is already being written in the SQLA query syntax section

### Examples 
#### Simple Select 
```python 
statement = select(
  models.Table.ColumnA, 
  models.Table.ColumnB, 
)
query = session.execute(statement).scalars()

> for column_a, column_b in query: 

Reviewer 2: This PR warranted additional discussion. This particular example isn’t even functional!

Reviewer: I re-opened https://github.com/rucio/documentation/issues/287, we can track follow-up comments on there and address them

  ...
```
#### Select with Join 
```python 
statement = select(
  models.Table1.ColumnA, 
  models.Table1.ColumnB, 
  models.Table2.Column2
).join(
  models.Table2, 
  (models.Table1.keyA == models.Table2.keyA) & (models.Table1.keyB == models.Table2.keyB) 
)
query = session.execute(statement).scalars()
for column_a, column_b, column_c in query: 
  ...
```

#### Multiple Conditions
```python 
statement = select(
  models.Table1.Column_a, 
  models.Table1.Column_b, 
  models.Table1.Column_c,
).where(
  and_(
    models.Table1.Condition1 == True,  
    models.Table1.Condition2 != None, 
    models.Table1.Condition2 < {Different Statement}
  )
)
query = session.execute(statement).scalars()
for column_a, column_b, column_c in query: 
  ...
```

> #### Checking existance/Single Value

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Checking existence/Single Value
```

> When using the query to ensure that table has been populated, or only a single result is required, use either `session.execute().one()` or `session.execute().scalar_one()`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using the query to ensure that the table has been populated, or only a single result is required, use either `session.execute().one()` or `session.execute().scalar_one()`. 
```

```python
statement = select(model.Table.Column).where(Condition)
try: 
  session.execute(statement).one() 
except NoResultFound as e: 
  ... # Handle the case where nothing exists 
```

```python 
statement = select(model.Table).where(Condition)
query = session.execute(statement).scalar_one()
foo(query.Column1, query.Column2)
```

# Pre-commits 
Rucio uses the [`flake8`](https://github.com/PyCQA/flake8) precommit as a linter, [`ruff`](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff-pre-commit) as a formatter, 

> a custom write-space remover, and a script to verify a uniform file-header format. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a custom whitespace remover, and a script to verify a uniform file-header format. 
```

Please use these before submitting a pull request. 

The Rucio repo provides a `pre-commit` that does this automatically. 
Install it with the below commands. 

```shell
pip install pre-commit
pre-commit install
```

> # Github Actions 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# GitHub Actions 
```

---
id: dev_style_guide
title: Style Guide 
---

**TL;DR**  - Install the provided pre-commits, follow their recommendations

# General Style 
## Spacing
* Include 2 lines between functions outside of classes.
* Include 1 line between class methods.

> * Include 2 lines between the import block and main code body. 

Reviewer: I forgot to say why I think we might not want to do this: if we write out the automatic rules in the style guide, then we need to maintain both the automatic checks and the rules in the style guide.

A good compromise could be to add a link in the documentation that points to the linting config, so that contributors can check the current automatic style rules straight from the source

* Assignement (`=`) or comparision (`==`, `<`, `in`, etc) required surrounding white space, except when used in default definitions. 
* Colons in dictionaries or type annotations should have trailing, but not leading whitespace. 

## Imports
* Never import using `from x import *`
* Order alphabetically, then seperated into sections for internal and external dependencies. Group internal imports at the end of the block, and group imports from the same external package.
* Order modules such that `import {packageA}` is before `from {packageB} import {Module}`
* Do not import whole packages when single modules would suffice. 
* Unused imports must be removed. 
* When a large number of individual imports form a single package/module is required, group them together with `()` and separate them on their own lines. 
* When importing a module specifically for type checking (e.g. a core module that may not be included in every distribution of rucio, a type from SQLAlchemy), contain them in a block using 
```python
from typing import TYPE_CHECKING
if TYPE_CHECKING: 
    from {package} import {module}
```

> [`ruff's isort` implimentation](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/faq/#how-does-ruffs-import-sorting-compare-to-isort) handles import sorting in the rucio `pre-commit`s. 

Author: 😅

#### Examples: 
```python 
 # Wrong
import rucio  
from datetime import * 
import os 

 # Right
import os 
from datetime import datetime, timedelta

from rucio.core.did import add_did
```

```python 
 # Wrong
from packageA import moduleA, moduleB, moduleC, moduleD, moduleE, moduleF, moduleG, ...

 # Right
from packageA import ( 
  moduleA, 
  moduleB, 
  moduleC, 
  moduleD, 
  moduleE,
  moduleF, 
  moduleG, 
  ...
)
```
## Docstrings 
TBA 

# Testing Guide
* Use fixtures (found in the tests/conftest.py) or temporary object factories (tests/temp_factories.py) instead of making bare instances of rucio objects. 
* Only write tests derministically. Randomness produces [flaky tests](https://docs.pytest.org/en/7.1.x/explanation/flaky.html). 
* Only write tests that are "stand alone" - tests should be entirely self-contained besides for the beforementioned fixtures and factories. 
* If a test requires a configuration file changed, [use a fixture to modify a mock-configuration file.](https://github.com/rucio/rucio/blob/master/tests/conftest.py#L510)

> * If a test can interfer with another test (use the same database table, interact with a queue), mark it as `noparallel`. 

Author: Totally agreed, mostly just wanted to slip this information into the docs somewhere where people would see it. Perhaps this fits better into the contributor guide - Made an issue for this https://github.com/rucio/documentation/issues/309
